explain the meaning and importance of applying problem solving techniques.
identify steps in the problem solving process.
ractice solving problem.
explain the meaning and types of government.
illustrate the importance goverment.
explain the meaning and the structure of the national constitution.
How the constitution is made.
describe the importance of national constitution in Tanzania.
Its relationship to  the government of Tanzania.
How national constitution it is safeguarded.
define local government.
describe the structure of local government.
identify functions of local government.
participate actively in functions of either school or local government.
explain why the local government has an important effect on his/her life.
explain sources of local government revenue.
explain how the local government spend its revenue.
explain the meaning of central government.
describe the structure of the central government.
explain the functions of the central government.
differentiate between local government and central government.Identify sources of central government revenue.
explain the expenditure of the central government.
participate in different central government activities.
explain the reasons for and importance of Tanganyika and Zanzibar Union.
identify union matters in the government of the United Republic of Tanzania.
suggest strate gies for improving the union’s stability.
explain the meaning of democracy.
analyse the principles of democracy.
differentiate types of democracy.
assess whether Tanzania implements democracy in accordance with the principles of democracy.
differentiate democratic from non  democratic government.
analyse common features of multiparty democracy.
explain how he/ she can participate in democratic activities in the society.
explain the meaning and indicators of democratic elections.
explain the importance of democratic elections.
assess whether there are free and fair elections in Tanzania.
demonstrate a spirit of tolerance by accepting constructive criticism and defeat.
explain the meaning of gender.
identify different gender concepts.
identify gender issues in the society.
describe socio cultural practices that hinder equal participation between men and women in our society.
suggest correc tive measures against negative socio- cultural practices.
